=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<datatooltk> [I<option>]+

or

B<datatooltk-gui> [I<option>]+

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Reads and writes B<.dbtex> files for use with the B<datatool> LaTeX
package. This application can also import data from CSV files,
spreadsheets (B<.ods> or B<.xls>), SQL (only MySQL supported) or
B<.tex> files that define problems using the B<probsoln> package.
The use of this application as a helper for the B<datatool> package
can significantly speed document build time.

The B<datatooltk> application can be run in either batch mode or GUI
mode.

=head1 OPTIONS

Some of the options may have the default settings change through the
GUI interface. You can't combine any of the load/import options:
B<--in>, B<--csv>, B<--xls>, B<--ods>, B<--sql>, B<--probsoln>. You
also can't combine any of the merge options: B<--merge>,
B<--merge-csv>, B<--merge-xls>, B<--merge-ods>, B<--merge-sql>, 
B<--merge-probsoln>. The merge import options use the same settings
as the import options. See the B<datatooltk> user manual for further
details.

=over 4

=item B<--gui> (or B<-g>)

Invoke B<datatooltk> in GUI mode. The command line invocation

B<datatooltk-gui> [I<option>]+

is equivalent to

B<datatooltk> B<--gui> [I<option>]+

but additionally has a splash screen.

=item B<--batch> (or B<-b>)

Invoke B<datatooltk> in batch mode.

=item B<--output> I<filename> (or B<-o> I<filename>)

Save the database to I<filename> (batch mode only).

=item B<--in> I<filename> (or B<-i> I<filename>) 

Load I<filename> which must be a file that can be loaded in a
document using B<\input> or B<\DTLloaddbtex>.

=item B<--tex-encoding> I<encoding>

Set the encoding for the TeX (B<.tex> and B<.dbtex>) files to 
I<encoding>. The I<encoding> may be the keyword B<default>
or an empty string to indicate the default file encoding (as
understood by the Java Virtual Machine). Make sure that your LaTeX
document matches the given encoding.

=item B<--name> I<name>

If used with B<--in>, B<--csv>, B<--sql>, B<--xls>, B<--ods>
or B<--probsoln> this sets the database label to I<name>.

=item B<--version> (or B<-v>)

Print the version details to STDOUT and exit.

=item B<--help> (or B<-h>)

Print a brief summary of available options to STDOUT and exit.

=item B<--debug>

Enable debug mode.

=item B<--nodebug>

Disable debug mode.

=item B<--compat> I<level>

Set the compatibility level. The argument I<level> may be B<latest>
or B<1.6>. The B<1.6> setting only affects B<--shuffle> and is
provided for old documents.

=item B<--owner-only>

Set read/write permissions when saving B<.dbtex> files to owner
only. (Has no effect on some operating systems.)

=item B<--noowner-only>

Don't change read/write permissions when saving B<.dbtex> files.

=item B<--map-tex-specials>

Map TeX special characters when importing data from CSV or SQL.

=item B<--nomap-tex-specials>

Don't map TeX special characters when importing data from CSV or
SQL.

=item B<--seed> I<number>

Set the random generator seed to I<number> or clear if if I<number>
is the empty string.

=item B<--shuffle>

Shuffle the database. (Always performed after B<--sort> regardless
of the option order.)

=item B<--noshuffle>

Don't shuffle the database.

=item B<--sort> [I<prefix>]I<field>

Sort the database according to the column whose label is I<field>.
Optionally, I<prefix> may be B<+> (ascending order) or B<-> (descending
order). If I<prefix> is omitted, ascending is assumed.

=item B<--sort-locale> I<value>

If the I<value> is B<none> then use letter-sorting for strings.
(That is, compare the Unicode values for each character.) Otherwise
I<value> should be a valid IETF language tag that identifies the
locale to sort by.

=item B<--sort-case-sensitive>

Use case-sensitive comparison when letter-sorting strings. (Ignored
with locale-sensitive comparisons.)

=item B<--sort-case-insensitive>

Use case-insensitive comparison when letter-sorting strings. (Ignored
with locale-sensitive comparisons.)

=item B<--truncate> I<n>

Truncate the database to the first I<n> rows. Truncation is always 
performed last (after any sorting, shuffling and filtering).

=item B<--filter> I<key> I<operator> I<value>

Adds the given filter. This filter returns true if the value in the
column whose label is given by I<key> matches the operation 
I<operator> I<value> where I<operator> may be one of: B<eq> (equals), 
B<ne> (does not equal), B<le> (less than or equal to), B<lt> (less
than), B<ge> (greater than or equal to), B<gt> (greater than) or
B<regex> (matches the regular expression given by I<value>).

Filtering is always performed after sorting and shuffling (when
those actions are specified). Numerical comparisons are used for
columns identified as containing numerical data otherwise string
comparisons are used, except in the case of B<regex> where the data
type is disregarded and all values are assumed to be strings.

This option may be used multiple times.

=item B<--filter-or>

Use OR operator when filtering. (Has no effect with only one
instance of B<--filter>.)

=item B<--filter-and>

Use AND operator when filtering. (Has no effect with only one
instance of B<--filter>.)

=item B<--filter-include>

When filtering, only retain rows that match the filter. Non-matching
rows are discarded.

=item B<--filter-exclude>

When filtering, only retain rows that don't match the filter.
Matching rows are discarded.

=item B<--merge> I<key> I<db file>

Merges the input or imported database with the database stored in
the given B<db file>. Each row in B<db file> is merged with the row
that has a matching value in the column whose label is given by
I<key>. Both databases must contain a column with that label.
If both databases share additional columns, the values in I<db file>
override those in the original database. This options is always
implemented before any sorting, shuffling, filtering or truncating.
Only one of the merge options is permitted.

=item B<--csv> I<csv file>

Import data from the given CSV file.

=item B<--merge-csv> I<key> I<csv file>

As B<--merge> but the data to be merged is imported from the given
CSV file.

=item B<--csv-sep> I<character>

Specify the character used to separate values in the CSV file.

=item B<--csv-delim> I<character>

Specify the character used to delimit values in the CSV file.

=item B<--csv-encoding> I<encoding>

Set the encoding for the CSV files to I<encoding>. The value may
be B<default> or the empty string to indicate the default (as
recognised by the Java Virtual Machine). This setting is independent
of the TeX file encoding.

=item B<--csv-header>

The CSV file has a header row.

=item B<--nocsv-header>

The CSV file doesn't have a header row.

=item B<--csv-escape> I<character>

Set the CSV file escape character to I<character>.

=item B<--nocsv-escape>

Don't have an escape character for the CSV file.

=item B<--xls> I<xls file>

Import data from the given Excel B<.xls> file.

=item B<--merge-xls> I<key> I<xls file>

As B<--merge> but the data to be merged is imported from the given
Excel file.

=item B<--ods> I<ods file>

Import data from the given Open Document Spreadsheet B<.ods> file.

=item B<--merge-ods> I<key> I<ods file>

As B<--merge> but the data to be merged is imported from the given
Open Document Spreadsheet B<.ods> file.

=item B<--sheet> I<sheet id>

The sheet to select from the Excel workbook or Open Document
Spreadsheet. The I<sheet id> may be either an index (starting from 0) 
or the name of the sheet. If this option is omitted, the first sheet
is assumed.

=item B<--sql> I<statement>

Import data from an SQL database where I<statement> is a SELECT
statement.

=item B<--merge-sql> I<key> I<statement>

As B<--merge> but the data to be merged is imported using the given
SQL statement.

=item B<--sqldb> I<name>

The SQL database name.

=item B<--sqlprefix> I<prefix>

The Java SQL prefix. Currently only MySQL is supported.

=item B<--sqlport> I<port>

The SQL port number.

=item B<--sqlhost> I<host>

The SQL host.

=item B<--sqluser>  I<user name>

The SQL user name.

=item B<--sqlpassword> I<password>

(Insecure!) The SQL password. If omitted, you will be prompted for
the password if you try to import data from an SQL database.

=item B<--wipepassword>

For extra security, wipe the password from memory as soon as it has
been connected to an SQL database.

=item B<--nowipepassword>

Don't wipe the password from memory as soon as it has been used to
connect to an SQL database.

=item B<--noconsole-action> I<action>

If in batch mode and an SQL password is required and B<--sqlpassword>
hasn't been used, the default action is for B<datatooltk> to request
a password via the console. If there is no console available the
action is determined by I<action> which may be one of:

=over 4

=item B<error>

Issue an error;

=item B<stdin>

Request the password via STDIN (less secure than a console and can 
produce an annoying flicker);

=item B<gui>

Display a dialog box in which to enter the password.

=back

=item B<--probsoln> I<filename>

Import B<probsoln.sty> data from I<filename>.

=item B<--merge-probsoln> I<key> I<filename>

As B<--merge> but the data to be merged is imported from the given
B<probsoln.sty> file.

=back

=head1 REQUIRES

Java 7 and also Perl if plugins are required.

=head1 LICENSE

License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later
<http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

=head1 RECOMMENDED READING

The datatooltk manual (available as a PDF or through the GUI).

The datatool manual:

        texdoc datatool

=head1 AUTHOR

Nicola L. C. Talbot,
L<http://www.dickimaw-books.com/>

=cut

